'\" e
.\" @(#)lp.1 1.36 95/10/09 SMI; from SVr4
.\" Copyright 1989 AT&T
.\" Copyright (c) 1995, Sun Microsystems, Inc.
.\" All Rights Reserved
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1992, X/Open Company Limited
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1996, Patrick Powell
.\" All Rights Reserved
.ig
.EQ
gsize 10
delim $$
.EN
..
.TH CANCEL 1 \*(VE "LPRng"
.SH NAME
cancel \- send cancel requests to an LPRng print service
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cancel
[
.BI \-P " printer"
] [
.BI \-D " debug-options"
]
.if n .ti +5n
[
.IR request-ID \|.\|.\|.
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "cancel command" "" "\fLcancel\fP \(em cancel requests to an LP print service"
.IX "LPRng print services" "cancel requests" "" "cancel requests \(em \fLcancel\fP"
.IX "printers" "cancel requests" "" "cancel requests \(em \fLcancel\fP"
.LP
The LPRng
\f3lprm\fP
client supports an \f3cancel\fP interface when invoked with an
\f3cancel\fP
program name.
This is similar to the
.BR ex (1)
and
.BR vi (1)
programs.
The supported form of the \f3cancel\fP command
arranges for the named \f2jobs\fP to be removed
from the specified print queues.
The action is identical to that of
.BR lprm (1) ,
including the options,
with the difference that the last argument on the
command line can be an optional printer name.
If the name does not appear in the LPRng
printcap database,
then the name is assumed to be a job identifier.
.PP
The format of
.I request-ID
should be either the identifier field value or the job number
reported by LPQ.
.br
.ne 10
.SH OPTIONS
.LP
.TP
\f3\-P \f2printer\f1
printer name.
This is an alternate way of specifying
the printer.
The last argument is still checked
to see if it has a printcap entry.
.TP
.BI \-D " debug-options"
Debug options for the program.
.ne 10
.SH OPERANDS
The following operands are supported by
.BR cancel :
.TP 15
.I ID
A request
.IR ID ,
as returned by
.BR lp .
Specifying a request
.I ID
cancels the associated request even if it is currently printing.
.TP
.I printer
A printer name
(for a complete list of printer names, use
.BR lpq ).
Specifying a printer
cancels the request that is currently printing on that printer.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
See
.BR environ (5)
for descriptions of the following environment variables that affect the
execution of
.BR cancel :
.TP 15
.SB LPDEST
Determine the spool queue.
If the
.SB LPDEST
environment variable is not set,
the
.SB PRINTER
environment variable will be used.
The
.BI \-P \0dest
option takes precedence over
.SB LPDEST\s0\f1.
Results are undefined when
.B \-P
is not specified and
.SB LPDEST
contains a value that is not a valid device or destination name.
.TP
.SB PRINTER
Determine the output device or destination.
If the
.SB LPDEST
and
.SB PRINTER
environment variables are not set, an unspecified output device is used.  The
.BI \-P \0dest
option and the
.SB LPDEST
environment variable takes precedence over
.SB PRINTER\s0\f1.
Results are undefined when
.B \-P
is not specified,
.SB LPDEST
is unset, and
.SB PRINTER
contains a value that is not a valid device or destination name.
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
The following exit values are returned by
.BR cancel :
.TP 15
.B 0
Successful completion.
.TP
.B >0
An error occurred.
.SH SEE ALSO
lpd.conf(5),
lpc(8),
lpd(8),
lpr(1),
lpq(1),
lprm(1),
printcap(5),
lpd.perms(5),
pr(1).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.nf
Most of the diagnostics are self explanatory.
If you are puzzled over the exact cause of failure,
set the debugging level on (-D5) and run again.
The debugging information will 
help you to pinpoint the exact cause of failure.
.fi
.SH "HISTORY"
LPRng is a enhanced printer spooler system
with functionality similar to the Berkeley LPR software.
The LPRng mailing list is lprng@lprng.com;
subscribe by sending mail to lprng-request@lprng.com with
the word subscribe in the body.
The software is available from ftp://ftp.astart.com/pub/LPRng.
.SH "AUTHOR"
Patrick Powell <papowell@astart.com>.
