.ds VE LPRng-3.6.12
'\" e
.\" @(#)lp.1 1.36 95/10/09 SMI; from SVr4
.\" Copyright 1989 AT&T
.\" Copyright (c) 1995, Sun Microsystems, Inc.
.\" All Rights Reserved
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1992, X/Open Company Limited
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1996, Patrick Powell
.\" All Rights Reserved
.ig
.EQ
gsize 10
delim $$
.EN
..
.TH LP 1 \*(VE "LPRng"
.SH NAME
lp \- send requests to an LPRng print service
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lp
[
.B \-A
] [
.B \-c
] [
.B \-m
] [
.B \-p
] [
.B \-s
] [
.B \-w
] [
.BI \-d " dest"
]
.if n .ti +5n
[
.BI \-f " form-name"
[
.B \-d any
] ]
.if t .ti +5n
[
.BI \-H " special-handling"
]
.if n .ti +5n
[
.BI \-n " number"
] [
.BI \-o " option"
] [
.BI \-P " page-list"
]
.if n .ti +5n
[
.BI \-q " priority-level"
]
.if t .ti +5n
[
.BI \-S " character-set"
[
.B \-d any
] ]
.if n .ti +5n
[
.BI \-S " print-wheel"
[
.BI \-t " title"
]
.if t .ti +5n
.if n .ti +5n
[
.BI \-T " content-type"
[
.B \-r
] ] [
.BI \-y " mode-list"
]
.if n .ti +5n
[
.BI \-D " debug-options"
]
.if n .ti +5n
[
.IR file \|.\|.\|.
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "lp command" "" "\fLlp\fP \(em send requests to an LP print service"
.IX "LPRng print services" "print files" "" "print files \(em \fLlp\fP"
.IX "printers" "send requests" "" "send requests \(em \fLlp\fP"
.LP
The LPRng
\f3lpr\fP
client supports an \f3lp\fP interface when invoked with the
\f3lp\fP
program name.
This is usually done by making a symbolic link to the
\f3lpr\fP program with the name
\f3lp\fP.
This is similar to the
.BR ex (1)
and
.BR vi (1)
programs.
The supported form of the \f3lp\fP command
arranges for the named \f2file(s)\fP and associated information
(collectively called a
.IR request )
to be printed.
If no file names are specified on the command line,
the standard input is assumed.
The standard input may be specified
along with a named \f2file\f1(s)
on the command line by listing the file name(s)
and specifying \`\f3\-\f1\' (dash)
for the standard input.
The \f2files\f1 will be printed
in the order in which they appear on the shell command line.
.LP
The
.SM LP
print service
associates a unique \f2request-ID\f1
with each request
and displays it on the standard output.
The job number portion or full request-ID can be used later with
.BR cancel (1)
or
.BR lprm (1)
when canceling a job or when determining its status.
See 
.BR cancel (1)
and
.BR lprm (1)
for details about canceling a request,
and
.BR lpstat (1)
and
.BR lpq (1)
for information about checking the status of a print request.
.SH OPTIONS
.LP
Options to
.B lp
always precede any file names,
but may be specified in any order.
The following options are available for
.BR lp :
.TP 15
.B \-A
Use authenticated transfer.
Note that this is not a standard
.BR lp (1)
option but has been added for compatibilty with LPRng.
.TP 15
.B \-c
Make a copy
of the
.I file
before printing.
(This has no effect as LPRng always sends
jobs immediately to the remote server for printing.)
.TP
.BI \-d " dest"
Choose
.I dest
as the printer or class of printers
that is to do the printing.
By default,
.I dest
is taken from
the environment variable
.B \s-1LPDEST\s+1
(if it is set),
and then 
.B \s-1PRINTER\s+1 .
Otherwise, a default destination (if one exists)
for the computer system is used.
.TP
\f3\-f \f2form-name\f1
Print the request on the form
.IR form-name .
The first letter of the
\f2form-name\f1
option is used as the LPRng filter format.
This is similar to the lpr -F option.
.TP 15
.BI \-H " special-handling"
These options are ignored.
.TP 15
.B \-m
Send mail (see
.BR mail (1))
after the files have been printed.
The mail address is taken from the USER enviroment
variable.
By default, no mail is sent
upon normal completion of the print request.
.TP
.BI \-n " number"
Print
.I number
copies (default is
.BR 1 )
of the output.
.br
.ne 5
.TP
.BI \-o " option"
Specify printer-dependent
.IR options .
Several such
.I options
may be collected by specifying
the
.B \-o
keyletter more than once
(\f3\-o $option sub 1$\f3
\-o $option sub 2$\f2 ... \f3\-o $option sub n$\f1),
or by specifying
the \f3\-o\f1 keyletter followed by
a list of options
enclosed in double quotes
(that is, \f3\-o "$option sub 1$\f3
$option sub 2$\f3 \f2... $option sub n$\f3"\f1).
The following options have a immediate effect;
other options are passed as a
.B Z
line entry in the control file,
i.e. - as an 
.BI lpr (1)
.B \-Z
option.
.RS 15
.TP 10
.B nobanner
Do not print a banner page with this request.
This is the same as the
.BI lpr (1)
.B -h
(no header) option.
.TP  10
\f3width\f2=number\f1
Print this request with page-width set to
\f2number\f1.
This is the same as the
.BI lpr (1)
.BI -w " width"
option.
.RE
.TP 15
.BI \-P " page-list"
Print the pages specified in \f2page-list\f1.
This option is ignored.
.TP
.B \-p
Enable notification on completion of the print request.
This option is ignored.
.TP
.BI \-q " priority-level"
Assign this request \f2priority-level\f1 in the printing queue.
The values of \f2priority-level\f1 range from
.BR 0 ,
the highest priority, to
.BR 25 ,
the lowest priority.  If a priority is not specified, the default
for the print service is used, as assigned by the system administrator.
A priority limit may be assigned to individual users by the
system administrator.
The numerical values are translated to corresponding letter
priority values.
.TP 15
.B \-s
Suppress messages from \f3lp\f1
such as those that begin with "\f3request id is\f1\|.\|.\|."
.PD 0
.TP 15
\f3\-S \f2character-set \f1
.TP 15
\f3\-S \f2print-wheel\f1
.PD
Print this request using the specified \f2character-set\f1
or \f2print-wheel\f1.
The options are passed as an
.BI lpr (1)
.B \-Z
option.
.br
.ne 7
.TP
\f3\-t \f2title\f1
Print
.I title
on the banner page of the output.
If
.I title
is not supplied the name of the file is printed on the banner
page.
Enclose \f2title\fP in quotes if it contains blanks.
.TP
\f3\-T \f2content-type\f1 [\f3\-r\f1]
Print the request on a printer that can support
the specified \f2content-type\f1.
The
\f2content-type\f1
is passed as an
.BI lpr (1)
.B \-Z
option.
.TP
\f3\-w\f1
Write a message on the user's terminal after the
.I files
have been printed.
This option is ignored.
.TP
\f3\-y \f2mode-list\f1
Print this request
according to the printing modes listed in \f2mode-list\f1.
The
\f2mode-list-type\f1
is passed as an
.BI lpr (1)
.B \-Z
option.
.TP
\f3\-D \f2debug-optios\f1
A list of debug options for the program.
These can be a number (debug level) or keyword and level (flag),
such as 9, network, network+2, etc.
.ne 15
.SH OPERANDS
The following operands are supported by
.BR lp :
.TP 15
.I file
A path name of a file to be output.
If no
.I file
operands are specified,
or if a
.I file
operand is
.BR \- ,
the standard input will be used.
The
.BR \-
option must be last in the list.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
See
.BR environ (5)
for descriptions of the following environment variables that affect the
execution of
.BR lp
and
.BR cancel :
.TP 15
.SB LPDEST
Determine the output device or destination.
If the
.SB LPDEST
environment variable is not set,
the
.SB PRINTER
environment variable will be used.
The
.BI \-d \0dest
option takes precedence over
.SB LPDEST\s0\f1.
Results are undefined when
.B \-d
is not specified and
.SB LPDEST
contains a value that is not a valid device or destination name.
.TP
.SB PRINTER
Determine the output device or destination.
If the
.SB LPDEST
and
.SB PRINTER
environment variables are not set, an unspecified output device is used.  The
.BI \-d \0dest
option and the
.SB LPDEST
environment variable takes precedence over
.SB PRINTER\s0\f1.
Results are undefined when
.B \-d
is not specified,
.SB LPDEST
is unset, and
.SB PRINTER
contains a value that is not a valid device or destination name.
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
The following exit values are returned by
.BR lp :
.TP 15
.B 0
All input files were processed successfully.
.TP
.B >0
No output device was available, or an error occurred.
.SH SEE ALSO
lpd.conf(5),
lpc(8),
lpd(8),
lpr(1),
lpq(1),
lprm(1),
printcap(5),
lpd.perms(5),
pr(1).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.nf
Most of the diagnostics are self explanatory.
If you are puzzled over the exact cause of failure,
set the debugging level on (-D5) and run again.
The debugging information will 
help you to pinpoint the exact cause of failure.
.fi
.SH "HISTORY"
LPRng is a enhanced printer spooler system
with functionality similar to the Berkeley LPR software.
The LPRng mailing list is lprng@lprng.com;
subscribe by sending mail to lprng-request@lprng.com with
the word subscribe in the body.
The software is available from ftp://ftp.astart.com/pub/LPRng.
.SH "AUTHOR"
Patrick Powell <papowell@astart.com>.
