.ds VE LPRng-3.1.2
.TH LPBANNER 1 \*(VE "LPRng"
.ig
$Id: lpbanner.1,v 3.4 1997/01/31 22:42:36 papowell Exp $
..
.SH NAME
lpbanner \- print a banner
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lpbanner
[
.BI \-l length
] [
.BI \-w widht
] [
.BI \-P printer
] [
.BI \-L bannername
] [
.BI \-n loginname
] [
.BI \-h host
] [
.BI \-J jobtitle
] [
.BI \-C class
] [
.BI \-? option
.BI args
] [
all
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The
.B lpbanner
program is used to print a simple banner on a fixed size font printer.
All information to be printed is passed using command line arguements.
In order to be compatible with vintage line printer spoolers,
reads a line form standard input, but ignores the information.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\fB\-w \fIwidth\fR" 5
Page width in characters (default 132).
.IP "\fB\-l \fIlength\fR" 5
Page length in lines (default 60).
.IP "\fB\-P \fIprinter\fR" 5
printer queue for banner information.
.IP "\fB\-L \fIbannername\fR" 5
Name used on banner as main name.
.IP "\fB\-n \fIloginname\fR" 5
Name used on banner as login name.
.IP "\fB\-h \fIhost\fR" 5
Name used on banner as host name.
.IP "\fB\-J \fIjobtitle\fR" 5
String used on banner as main title.
.IP "\fB\-C \fIclass\fR" 5
String used on banner as class.
.IP "\fB\-? \fIvalue\fR" 5
All other options and arguments provided by LPRng are ignored.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.LP
lpd.conf(5),
lpc(8),
lpd(8),
lpr(1),
lpq(1),
lprm(1),
printcap(5),
lpd.conf(5),
pr(1).
.SH "HISTORY"
.LP
LPRng is a enhanced printer spooler system
with functionality similar to the Berkeley LPR software.
In 1988 Patrick Powell released
the PLP (Public Line Printer) software,
which went through several evolutions.
Justin Mason (jmason@iona.ie)
generated PLP4.0 from several older releases of PLP.
In 1992 Patrick Powell
release LPRng,
a completely redesigned and newly written version of the software.
.LP
The LPRng mailing list is plp@iona.ie;
subscribe by sending mail to plp-request@iona.ie with
the word subscribe in the body.
The software is available from ftp://iona.ie/pub/LPRng.
.LP
LPRng is distributed under the GNU software license for non-commercial
use,
the Artistic License for limited commercial use. 
Commerical support and licensing is available through
Patrick Powell <papowell@sdsu.edu>.
